## A P P E N D I X  B

## Glossary of Linux Terms

This appendix provides brief explanations of common terms used in the Linux and UNIX environments. These include technical terms, as well as conventions used in the Linux community. Because of space limitations, this glossary is somewhat selective but still should prove a lasting reference as well as a helpful guide for those new to Linux.

Cross-referenced terms are highlighted in italics.

### Symbols

**.**

In the context of file management at the *command-line prompt*, this symbol refers to the current directory.

**..**

In the context of file management at the *command-line prompt*, this symbol refers to the parent directory of that currently being browsed.

**/**

In the context of file management at the *command-line prompt*, the forward slash refers to the *root* of the file system; it also separates directories in a path listing.

**~**

In the context of file management at the *command-line prompt*, the tilde refers to a *user*’s home directory.

**|**

The pipe symbol is used at the *command-line prompt* to *pipe* output from one *command* to another.

**>**

When used at the *command-line prompt*, the right angle bracket indicates that output should *redirect* into a file.

**<**

When used at the *command-line prompt*, the left angle bracket indicates that a *command* should accept input from a file (see *redirect).*

**#**

When it appears at the *command-line prompt*, this symbol usually indicates that the *user* is currently logged in as *root.*

**$**

When it appears at the *command-line prompt*, the dollar sign usually indicates that the *user* is currently logged in as an ordinary user. (Note that some versions of *Linux*/*UNIX* use `%` or `>` instead of `$`.)

**?**

The question mark is a wildcard character indicating that any character can be substituted in its place; this symbol is typically relevant only at the *command-line prompt*.

*****

The asterisk is a wildcard character indicating that zero or more characters can appear in its place; this symbol is typically relevant only at the *command-line prompt*.

***nix**

Popular but unofficial way of describing the family tree that comprises *UNIX* and its various clones, such as *Linux* and *Minix*.

### A

**administrator**

A *user* on the system with ultimate power to configure the system. Usually under standard *Linux* installations, this is another word for either the *root user* or one who has adopted that user’s powers temporarily.

**AIX**

IBM’s *proprietary* form of *UNIX* that runs on the company’s proprietary hardware, as well as *commodity* hardware based around AMD and Intel processors. Nowadays, IBM is slowly deprecating AIX in favor of *Linux.*

**alias**

Method of creating a *user*-defined *command* that, when typed, causes another command to be run or a *string* to be expanded.

**Apache**

Popular *open source* web *server* software that runs on *UNIX*, *Linux*, and other operating system platforms. Considered responsible in part for the rise in popularity of Linux in the late 1990s.

**applet**

Small program that, in the context of the *Ubuntu* Desktop, runs as part of a larger program and offers functions that complement the main program. The *GNOME* desktop incorporates several applets, and—technically speaking—all features or elements of the panels are applets, including even the main menus.

**APT**

Advanced Packaging Tool; the underlying system by which software is managed and installed on *Ubuntu* and *Debian* *Linux* systems. *Shell* commands beginning with `apt`, such as `apt-get`, are used to install new software from various repositories. Under Ubuntu, the Synaptic Package Manager program provides a *GUI* method of using APT.

**archive**

Any file containing a collection of smaller files, compressed or otherwise (see also *tar*).

### B

**BASH**

Bourne Again SHell. The most common *shell* interpreter used under *Linux* and offered as the default on many Linux systems. Based on the older Bourne `sh` software.

**binary executable**

Another way of referring to a program that has been compiled so that it can be used day to day. See also *compilation*.

**block device**

How the *Linux kernel* communicates with a *device* that sends and receives blocks of data; usually a hard disk or removable storage device*.* See also *character device*.

**BSD UNIX**

Berkeley Software Distribution UNIX; form of *UNIX* partially based on the original UNIX *source code* but also incorporating recent developments. BSD is *open source* and *free* for all to use and share, with practically no restrictions. There are various forms of BSD UNIX, such as FreeBSD, NetBSD, and OpenBSD. BSD doesn’t use the *Linux kernel* but runs many of the same programs. Some of the programs offered within the Linux OS come from BSD.

**bzip2**

Form of file compression. Together with the older and less-efficient *gzip,* it is a popular form of file compression under *Linux* and the equivalent to Zip compression under Windows. Files employing bzip compression are usually given a `.bz2` file extension (*tar* files are usually given the double file extension `.tar.bz2`, or occasionally just `.tbz`). See also *tar*.

### C

**C**

Programming language in which much of the *Linux kernel* is written, as were later versions of *UNIX* before it. C was created by some of the same people who created UNIX, and its development mirrors that of UNIX.

**C++**

Object-oriented programming language; originally designed to be an enhancement to *C*, but now seen as a popular alternative.

**C#**

Modern programming language, which uses similar syntax to *C*, created by Microsoft and re-created on *Linux* via the Mono project.

**character device**

How Linux refers to a *device* that sends/receives data asynchronously. For various technical reasons, this typically refers to the *terminal* display. See also *block device*.

**checksum**

Mathematical process that can be applied to a file or other data to create a unique number relative to the contents of that file. If the file is modified, the checksum will change, usually indicating that the file in question has failed to download correctly or has been modified in some way. The most common type of checksum program used under *Linux* and *UNIX* is `md5sum`.

**ClamAV**

Virus scanner for Linux and UNIX systems. Published under the GPL license, so free for use.

**client**

Shorthand referring to a computer (or software) that connects to a *server*.

**closed source**

The reverse of *open source*, in which the *source code* is not available for others to see, share, or modify. See also *proprietary*.

**code**

See *source code*.

**command**

Input typed at the *shell* that performs a specific task, usually related to administration of the system and/or the manipulation of files.

**command-line prompt**

See *shell*.

**commodity**

In the context of hardware, describes PC hardware usually based around Intel or AMD processors that can be bought off the shelf and used to create sophisticated computer systems (as opposed
to buying specially designed hardware). One reason for *Linux*‘s success is its ability to use commodity hardware.

**community**

The general term for the millions of *Linux users* worldwide, regardless of what they use Linux for or their individual backgrounds. By using Linux, you automatically become part of the community.

**compilation**

The practice of creating a binary file from *source code*, usually achieved using the `./configure`, `make`, `make install` series of *commands* and *scripts*.

**config file**

Configuration file; any file that contains the list of settings for a program. Sometimes it’s necessary to edit config files by hand by using programs such as *vi* or *Emacs,* but often the program itself will write its config file according to the settings you choose.

**copyleft**

The legal principle of protecting the right to share a creative work, such as a computer program, using a legally binding license. Copyleft also ensures that future iterations of the work are covered in the same way.

**cracker**

Someone who breaks into computer systems to steal data or cause damage. The term is not necessarily linked to *Linux* or *UNIX* but was created by the *community* to combat the widespread use of *hacker* in this sense. The word *hacker* has traditionally defined someone who merely administers, programs, and generally enjoys computers.

**cron**

Background *service* that schedules tasks to occur at certain times. It relies on the `crontab` file.

**CUPS**

Common UNIX Printing System; set of programs that work in the background to handle printing under *UNIX* and *Linux*.

**curses**

*Library* that lets software present a semigraphical interface at the *shell*, complete with menu systems and simple mouse control (if configured). The version of curses used under *Linux* and *UNIX* is called `ncurses`.

**CVS**

Concurrent Versions System; application that allows the latest version of software packages to be distributed over the Internet to developers and other interested parties. Nowadays Git or Subversion are preferred instead and work along similar lines.

### D

**daemon**

See *service*.

**Debian**

*Community* organization that produces *distributions* of *free software* operating systems, including *Linux*. Because it is a nonprofit organization run by passionate free software advocates, it is considered the most ethically sound of all Linux outfits. Many distributions, including *Ubuntu*, use Debian as the basis for their software because of its claimed reliability, relative simplicity, and certain sophisticated features, such as the *APT* software management system.

**dependency**

A way of referring to system files or other software that a program requires in order to run. If the dependencies are not present during program installation, a program might refuse to install. By using *repositories*, Ubuntu fixes the dependency problem.

**device**

*Linux* shorthand describing something on your system that provides a function for the *user* or that the system requires in order to run. This usually refers to hardware, but it can also describe a virtual device that is created to provide access to a particular Linux function.

**directory**

What Windows refers to as a folder; areas on a hard disk in which files can be stored and organized.

**distribution**

A collection of software making up the *Linux* operating system; also known as a *distro*. The software is usually compiled by either a company or organization. A distribution is designed to be easy to install, administer, and use by virtue of it being an integrated whole. Examples include *Ubuntu*, SUSE *Linux*, *Red Hat*, and *Debian*.

**distro**

Shorthand for *distribution.*

**documentation**

Another way of describing written guides or instructions; can refer to online sources of help as well as actual printed documentation.

**dpkg**

Debian package management system; *shell command* that can be used to administer software under *Ubuntu* and *Debian*. However, the *APT* system, which uses `dpkg`, is the preferred method of installing software.

### E

**Edubuntu**

Official spin-off of the main *Ubuntu* project that features educational software along with a child-friendly user interface and classroom administration software. Unlike other spin-off projects, such as *Xubuntu* and *Kubuntu*, Edubuntu features the same *GNOME* interface as the main Ubuntu release, and much of the same software.

**Emacs**

Seminal text editor and pseudo-*shell* beloved by *UNIX* aficionados; can be used for programming tasks, simple word processing, and much more. This editor has cultural significance as one of the core pieces of software offered by the *GNU Project.* Emacs was originally developed principally by *Richard Stallman*. See also *vi.*

**environment**

Shorthand referring to a *user*‘s unique *Linux* configuration, such as *variables* that tell the *shell* where programs are located.

### F

**FAT32**

File Allocation Table 32-bits; file system offered by Windows 98, Me, 2000, and XP. *Linux* can both read and write to FAT32 file systems. See also *NTFS* and *VFAT*.

**Firefox**

Web browser program used under *Ubuntu* and produced by the *Mozilla Foundation*.

**FLOSS**

Free, libre, or open source software; used within the *community* to describe all software or technology that, broadly speaking, adheres to the ethical approach of *open source* software and/or *free software*, as well as its legal guidelines.

**FOSS**

*Free* or *open source* software; alternative term for *FLOSS*.

**free**

When used to describe software or associated areas of technology, *free* indicates that the project abides by the ethical (if not legal) guidelines laid down by the *GNU Project*. It doesn’t necessarily indicate that the software is free in a monetary sense; its meaning is quite different from freeware.

**Free software**

Software in which the *source code*—the original listing created by the programmer—is available for all to see, share, study, and adapt to their own needs. This differs from the concept of *open source,* because the right of others to further modify the code is guaranteed via the *GNU Public License* (GPL) software license (or a compatible license). For various reasons, in some instances free software does not include the source code (although the software can still be legally decompiled), but this is rare.

**Free Software Foundation**

Nonprofit organization founded by *Richard Stallman* to effectively sponsor the creation of the *GNU* operating system, and further the aims and goals of *free software* (including the legal documents, such as the *GPL*). It is considered the home of the free software ideal and GNU itself. Sometimes abbreviated as FSF.

### G

**GCC**

GNU Compiler Collection; programs used when creating *binary executable* files from *source code*. Formerly called GNU C Compiler.

**GID**

Group ID; numbering system used by the operating system to refer to a *group*.

**GIMP**

GNU Image Manipulation Program; high-powered image-editing program that runs under *Linux, UNIX,* Windows, and other operating systems*.* Often preceded by the definite article: The GIMP.

**GNOME**

A *GUI*-based desktop *environment* used by *Ubuntu* as well as several other *distributions*. It uses the GTK+ libraries. The name was originally created as an acronym standing for GNU Network Object Model Environment, but now the term is considered a word and not an acronym. See also *KDE.*

**GNU**

GNU’s Not UNIX; seminal operating system project initiated by *Richard Stallman* in 1983 and intended to form a *free software* clone of *UNIX*. See *GNU Project*.

**GNU/Linux**

Another name for the operating system referred to as *Linux*. The name GNU/Linux gives credit
to the vast quantity of *GNU Project* software that is added to the *Linux kernel* within a *distro* to
make a complete operating system. As such, GNU/Linux is the preferred term of many *free*
*software* advocates.

**GNU Project**

Organization created by *Richard Stallman* in order to further the aims of *free software* and create the body of software that makes up the *GNU* operating system.

**GNU Public License**

Software license principally created by *Richard Stallman* in order to protect software *source code* against *proprietary* interests and ensure that it will always be shared. It does this by insisting that any source code covered by the GNU Public License (GPL) must remain licensed under the GPL, even after it has been modified or added to by others. The *Linux kernel*, as well as much of the software that runs on it, uses the GPL. There are several versions of the GNU Public License that refine its requirements and limitations (notably versions 2 and 3), and several variations designed for other uses; key examples include the Lesser GPL (*LGPL*), which relinquishes some requirements of the GPL and is usually used with *library* software, and the GNU Free Documentation License that, as its name suggests, is usually used to license technical literature, such as manuals.

**GPL**

See *GNU Public License*.

**grep**

Global regular expression print; powerful *shell command* that lets you search a file or other form of input by using *regular expressions.* Because of the ubiquity of the `grep` program, many *Linux* and *UNIX* users refer to searching as *grepping*. To *grep a file* is to search through it for a *string.*

**group**

Collection of *users* under one heading (group name) to facilitate system administration.

**GRUB**

GRand Unified Bootloader; boot manager program that offers a menu from which you can choose which operating system you wish to boot. It’s needed to load the *kernel* program and thereby initiate the *Linux* boot procedure.

**GUI**

Graphical user interface; describes the software that provides a graphical system to display data and let you control your PC (usually via a mouse).

**guru**

One who is experienced and knowledgeable about *Linux*/*UNIX* and is willing to share his or her knowledge with others. In a perfect world, every *newbie* would have his or her own guru.

**gzip**

One of the two preferred forms of file compression used under *Linux*. Files employing gzip compression usually have a `.gz` file extension. See also *bzip2*.

### H

**hack**

Ingenious and/or extremely efficient solution to a problem, particularly within the programming world.

**hacker**

Term used within the *community* to describe anyone who enjoys computers and possesses some skill therein, either in a professional capacity or as a hobby. A positive and highly valued term, the word is distinct from connotations of maliciously breaking into computers propagated by the media. See also *cracker*.

**host**

Shorthand referring to any computer that acts as a *server* to another computer. See also *client*.

**HP-UX**

Hewlett-Packard’s *proprietary* form of *UNIX* designed to work on its own hardware platform.

**Hurd**

*Kernel* developed by the *GNU Project* and originally intended to form the centerpiece of the *GNU* operating system. However, with the arrival of the *Linux kernel*, its necessity was lessened, and it is now arguably a minor project. It’s not associated with the Linux kernel in any way.

### I

**info**

Source of *documentation* accessible from the *shell*; an alternative to the more established *man page* system. Also known as Texinfo.

**init**

With most versions of *Linux*, `init` is the program that is automatically run after the *kernel* has finished loading, and therefore early in the boot procedure. It’s responsible for effectively starting the operating system. Under *Ubuntu*, a system called *Upstart* is used instead, but it is 100 percent backward-compatible with the way `init` works, to the extent that those not knowing Upstart was in use would not realize the difference.

**init.d**

Collection of startup *scripts* that make up the components of a *run level*. Under *Ubuntu*, these are found at `/etc/init.d`. *Symbolic links* to selected `init.d` scripts are contained in folders within `/etc/init.d` that are named after *run level* numbers, such as `rc0.d`, `rc1.d`, `rc2.d`, and so on.

**initrd**

Initial RAM disk; system used by the *Linux kernel* to load *modules* that are essential for the kernel to be able to boot, such as disk controllers.

**inode**

Part of the usually invisible file system structure that describes a file, such as its ownership permissions or file size.

**ipchains**

Now-deprecated component of version 2.2 of the *Linux kernel* that allows the creation of network security setups, such as firewalls or port-forwarding arrangements. See also *iptables.*

**iptables**

Component of versions 2.4 and 2.6 of the *Linux kernel* that allows powerful network security setups via the configuration of netfilter. Chiefly used in the creation of firewalls, but can be used for more elementary arrangements such as network address translation (NAT) routers. *Ubuntu* offers a far more user-friendly command-line tool called `ufw` that aids configuration of iptables.

### J

**job**

How the *BASH shell* refers to a running program in order to facilitate administration by the *user*.

**journaling**

File system technology in which integrity is maintained via the logging of disk writes.

### K

**KDE**

K Desktop Environment; *GUI* and set of additional programs used on various *distros,* such as Mandriva and a variation of *Ubuntu* called *Kubuntu*.

**kernel**

Essential but ordinarily invisible set of programs that run the computer’s hardware and provide a platform on which to run software. In the *Linux* operating system, the kernel is also called Linux, after its creator, *Linus Torvalds.*

**kernel panic**

Error message that appears when the *kernel* program in *Linux* cannot continue to work. In other words, a polite way of indicating a crash or, more often, a problem arising from *user* misconfiguration. This is most often seen when booting up after making incorrect changes to
the system. In general, it is quite rare to encounter a kernel panic.

**kludge**

*Community* slang describing an inelegant way of making something work, usually not in a way that is generally accepted as being correct. Pronounced *kloodge*.

**Kubuntu**

Version of *Ubuntu* that substitutes the *GNOME* desktop *environment* for *KDE*.

### L

**LAMP**

Acronym describing a series of programs that work together to provide a complete *Linux*-based web-hosting *environment*. Stands for *Linux*, *Apache*, *MySQL*, and PHP, Python, or Perl (the last three in the list are scripting languages; see *script*).

**LGPL**

Lesser GPL; version of the *GNU Public License* (GPL) in which some use restrictions are slackened
at the expense of various freedoms laid down by the main GPL. The LGPL is mostly used for
*library* files.

**library**

General term referring to *code* that programs need to run and that, once in memory, is frequently accessed by many programs (leading to the phrase “shared library”). The most common and vital library is glibc (GNU C Library), created by the *GNU Project* and the fundamental building block without which *Linux* could not operate. *GNOME* relies on the GTK+ libraries, among others.

**LibreOffice**

Free Office suite, available for different operating systems including Linux. Formerly known as OpenOffice.org. LibreOffice is included as the default office suite in Ubuntu.

**link**

File system method of assigning additional filenames to a block of data that represents a file; also known as a “hard link.” See also *symbolic link.*

**Linux**

(1) A *kernel* program created by *Linus Torvalds* in 1991 to provide an inexpensive operating system for his computer, along with other components.

(2) The entire operating system discussed in this book, although many argue (perhaps quite rightly) that this is inaccurate, and use the term *GNU/Linux* instead, to give credit to the inclusion of many components of the *GNU* operating system.

**Linux Foundation**

A nonprofit organization that aims to further the adoption of the *Linux* operating system, and as such is sponsored by many corporations that utilize the Linux OS as part of their business, such as IBM and Novell. It is considered the spiritual home of Linux, if such a distinction can be made, and employs *Linus Torvalds*, the originator and leader of the Linux *kernel* project.

**local**

Shorthand referring to the *user*‘s PC or a device directly attached to it (as opposed to *remote*).

**localhost**

Network name used internally by *Linux* and software to refer to the *local* computer, distinct from the network.

### M

**man page**

Concise technical *documentation* accessible from the *shell* that describes a *command* and how it should be used.

**Minix**

Created by Andrew Tanenbaum, this operating system is a rough clone of *UNIX.* It was the operating system that *Linus Torvalds* had in mind when devising *Linux,* and which acted as an early development platform for him.

**module**

Program *code* that can be inserted or removed from the *kernel* in order to support particular pieces of hardware or provide certain kernel functions. Drivers under Windows perform the same function.

**mount**

To add a file system so that it is integrated (and therefore accessible) within the main file system; applies to external file systems, such as those available across networks, as well as those on the *local* PC, such as the hard disk or CD/DVD-ROMs.

**Mozilla Foundation**

Organization founded by Netscape to create *open source* Internet software, such as web browsers and e-mail clients; originally based on the Netscape *source code*. At the time of this writing, it produces the *Firefox* and Camino web browsers, the Thunderbird e-mail and Usenet client, the Bugzilla bug-tracking software, as well as other programs. The underlying web-browsing engine software used by many Mozilla Foundation products is known as Gecko.

**MySQL**

Popular and powerful *open source* database application. See also *LAMP*.

### N

**newbie**

Term used to describe anyone who is new to *Linux* and therefore still learning the basics. It’s not a derogatory term! See also *guru*.

**NFS**

Network File System; reliable and established method of sharing files, printers, and other resources across a network of *UNIX*-based operating systems. See also *Samba*.

**NTFS**

NT File System; file system offered by Windows NT, 2000, XP, and Vista. It is usually fully accessible under *Linux*, although some distributions do not allow writing to NTFS *partitions*. See also *FAT32*.

### O

**open source**

(1) Method and philosophy of developing software whereby the *source code*—the original listing created by the programmer—is available for all to see. Note that open source is not the same as *free software*; describing software as open source doesn’t imply that the code can be shared or used by others (although this is often the case).

(2) A community of *users* or any project that adheres to open source values and/or practices.

**OpenOffice.org**

*Open source* office suite project created with the continuing input of Sun Microsystems (now part of Oracle) and based on *code* Sun contributed to the open source *community*.

### P

**partition**

Subdivision of a hard disk into which a file system can be installed.

**PID**

Process ID; the numbering system used to refer to a *process.*

**pipe**

Method of passing the output from one *command* to another for further processing. Piping is achieved within the *shell* by typing the `|` symbol.

**POSIX**

Portable Operating System Interface; various technical standards that define how *UNIX*-like operating systems should operate and to which the *Linux* operating system attempts to adhere.

**PPP**

Point-to-Point Protocol; networking technology that allows data transfer across serial connections such as telephone lines. In other words, it’s the technology that lets you connect to your Internet service provider by using a modem.

**process**

The way the system refers to the individual programs (or components of programs) running
in memory.

**proprietary**

Effectively, software for which a software license must be acquired, usually for a fee. This usually means that the *source code* is kept secret, but it can also indicate that the source code is available to view but not to incorporate into your own projects or share with others.

### R

**redirect**

Used to send the output of a *command* into a particular file. This also works the other way around: the contents of a particular file can be directed into a command. Redirection is achieved within the *shell* by using the left and right angle brackets (`<` and `>`), respectively.

**regex**

See *regular expression*.

**regular expression**

Powerful and complex method of describing a search *string*, usually when searching with tools such as *grep* (although regular expressions are also used when programming). Regular expressions use various symbols as substitutes for characters or to indicate patterns.

**remote**

Indicates a computer or *service* that is available across a network, including but not limited to computers on the Internet (as opposed to *local*).

**Repository**

Installation source where software installation programs are looking for available software. Using repositories makes it possible for the installation program to automatically install *dependencies*.

**root**

(1) The starting point of the *Linux* file system directory structure, usually indicated by a forward slash (`/`).

(2) The `/root` directory is effectively the root user’s personal directory.

(3) The hard disk *partition* on which operating system files are installed, sufficient to boot Linux; under *Ubuntu* the root partition contains all operating system and user data files.

(4) The *user* on some versions of *UNIX* or Linux who has control over all aspects of hardware, software, and the file system.

(5) Used to describe a user who temporarily takes on the powers of the root user (via the `sudo` command, for example).

**RPM**

Red Hat Package Manager; system used to install and administer programs under *Red Hat*, *SUSE Linux,* and some other *distributions*. The equivalent of *APT*.

**RTFM**

Read the Fine manual/*man page*; exclamation frequently used online when a *newbie* asks for help without having undertaken basic research.

**run level**

Describes the current operational mode of *Linux* (typically, the *services* that are running). Run level 1 is single-user mode (a stripped-down system with minimal running services); run levels 2 through 5 provide a *GUI*; run level 6 is reboot mode (switching to it will cause the computer to terminate its processes and then reboot); run level 0 is shutdown (switching to it will cause the PC to shut down). Under *Ubuntu* and most derivatives of *Debian*, run level 2 is the default.

### S

**Samba**

Program that re-creates under *UNIX* or *Linux* the Microsoft *SMB*-based system of sharing files, printers, and other computer resources across a network. It allows Linux to become a file or
printer *server* for Linux and Windows computers, and also allows a Linux *client* to access a Windows-based *server*.

**scalable**

Term describing the ability of a single computer program to meet diverse needs, regardless of the scale of the potential uses. The *Linux kernel* is described as being scalable because it can run supercomputers as well as handheld computers and home entertainment devices.

**script**

Form of computer program consisting of a series of *commands* in a text file. Most *shells* allow some form of scripting, and entire programming languages such as Perl are based around scripts. In the context of the *Linux* OS, shell scripts are usually created to perform trivial tasks or ones that frequently interact with the *user*. Shell scripts have the advantage that they can be frequently and easily modified. The Linux boot process relies on several complex scripts to configure essential system functions such as networking and the *GUI.* See also *init* and *Upstart*.

**server**

(1) Type of computer designed to share data with other computers over a network.

(2) Software that runs on a computer and is designed to share data with other programs on the same PC or with other PCs across a network.

**service**

Background program that provides vital functions for the day-to-day running of *Linux*; also known as a *daemon*. Services are usually started when the computer boots up and as such are constituent parts of a *run level*.

**shell**

Broadly speaking, any program that creates an operating *environment* in which you can control your computer. The *GNOME* Desktop can be seen as a shell, for example. However, it’s more commonly understood within *UNIX* and *Linux* circles as a program that lets you control the system by using *command*s entered at the keyboard. In this context, the most common type of shell in use on Linux is *BASH.*

**Shuttleworth, Mark**

Entrepreneurial South African businessman who, as a long-term *Debian hacker*, devised and financially supports *Ubuntu* via his company, Canonical Ltd.

**SMB**

Server Message Block; network technology for sharing files, printers, and other resources. See
also *Samba.*

**Solaris**

Form of *UNIX* sold by Sun Microsystems (now part of Oracle); runs on *proprietary* hardware systems as well as on *commodity* systems based on Intel and AMD processors. Available in an entirely *open source* rendition called OpenSolaris.

**source code**

The original program listing created by a programmer. Most programs that you download are precompiled—already turned into *binary executables* ready for general use—unless you specifically choose to download and compile the source code of a program yourself.

**SSH**

Secure SHell; program that lets you access a *Linux*/*UNIX* computer across the Internet. SSH encrypts data sent and received across the *link*. Very commonly used by professional Linux and UNIX administrators.

**SSL**

Secure Sockets Layer; form of network data transfer designed to encrypt information for security purposes. It’s used online for certain web sites and also within *Linux* for certain types of secure
data exchange.

**Stallman, Richard M.**

Legendary *hacker* who founded the *GNU Project* and created the concept of *copyleft*, as well as the software license that incorporates it: the *GNU Public License* (GPL). See also *Linus Torvalds.*

**standard error**

*Linux* and *UNIX* shorthand for the error output provided by a *command*.

**standard input**

*Linux* and *UNIX* shorthand for the *device* usually used to provide input to the *shell*. For the majority of desktop PC *users*, this refers to the keyboard.

**standard output**

*Linux* and *UNIX* shorthand for the *device* usually used to display output from a *command*. For the majority of desktop PC *users*, this refers to the screen.

**string**

A word, phrase, or sentence consisting of letters, numbers, or other characters that is used within a program and is often supplied by the *user*.

**sudo**

Program that runs under *UNIX* and *Linux* by which ordinary *users* are temporarily afforded *administrator* rights. *Ubuntu* relies on sudo as the exclusive way for users to administer the system. The equivalent command to start *GUI* applications under Ubuntu is `gksu`.

**SVG**

Scalable Vector Graphics; vector graphics technology. SVG is actually an XML markup language designed to create 2D graphics, increasingly used for *Linux* desktop icons and web graphics.

**swap**

Area of the hard disk that the *Linux kernel* uses as a temporary memory storage area. Desktop or *server* Linux differs from Windows in that it usually requires a separate hard disk *partition* in which to store the swap file.

**symbolic link**

Type of file akin to a Windows shortcut. Accessing a symbolic link file routes the *user* to an actual file. See also *link*.

**sysadmin**

Systems administrator; a way of describing the person employed within a company to oversee the computer systems. In such an *environment*, the sysadmin usually is the *root* user of the various computers.

**System V**

Variant of *UNIX* used as a foundation for modern forms of *proprietary* UNIX.

### T

**tainted**

Describes a *kernel* that is using *proprietary modules* in addition to *open source* modules. Can also refer to insecure software.

**tar**

Tape ARchive; software able to combine several files into one larger file in order to back them up to a tape drive or simply transfer them across the Internet. Such files are usually indicated by a `.tar` file extension. Note that a `tar` file isn’t necessarily compressed; the *bzip2* and *gzip* utilities must be used if this is desired.

**TCP/IP**

Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol; standard protocol stack used by most modern operating systems to control and communicate across networks and also across the Internet (as opposed to NetBEUI, commonly available on older versions of Windows, and IPX/SPX, used on Novell’s NetWare operating system).

**terminal**

Another word for *shell*.

**TeX**

Method and set of programs for typesetting complex documents. Invented prior to word processors and desktop publishing software, and now considered a specialized tool for laying out scientific texts. An updated version of the program called LaTeX is also available.

**Torvalds, Linus**

Finnish programmer who, in 1991, created the initial versions of the *Linux kernel*. Since then, he has utilized an international network of volunteers and staff employed by various companies who help produce the kernel. Torvalds himself contributes to and oversees the efforts and is employed by the *Linux Foundation.*

**tty**

TeleTYpewriter; shorthand referring to underlying *Linux* virtual *devices* that allow programs and *users* to access the *kernel* and thereby run programs.

**Tux**

The name of the penguin character that is the *Linux* mascot. The original Tux graphic was drawn by Larry Ewing.

### U

**Ubuntu**

*Linux* distribution with several unique characteristics. Ubuntu is designed primarily for desktop use (although other versions are available, including some for *server* hardware and for handheld computers). It is intended for use by individuals in any location in the world, so it has strong multiple-language support. It’s run by the *Ubuntu Foundation*, which is financially backed by *Mark Shuttleworth*. Each release is guaranteed to be supported for 18 months, or three years in the case of long-term support (LTS) releases (five years in the case of server releases).

**Ubuntu Foundation**

Organization set up by *Mark Shuttleworth* and his company, Canonical Ltd., to provide an official home for the *Ubuntu* distribution of *Linux*.

**UID**

User ID; numbering system used by the operating system to refer to a *user.*

**UNITY**

Name for the new graphical interface in Ubuntu 11.04\. It was originally developed as interface for portable devices, such as Netbooks. Because it proved to be very user friendly, it now is the default graphical interface for Ubuntu.

**UNIX**

Seminal operating system created as a research project in 1969 by Kenneth Thompson and Dennis Ritchie at Bell Labs (later AT&T). Because it was initially possible to purchase the *source code* for a fee, subsequent revisions were enhanced by a variety of organizations and went on to run many mainframe and minicomputer systems throughout the 1980s, 1990s, and up to the present. Nowadays, UNIX is fragmented and exists in a variety of versions. Perhaps most popular is its *open source* rendition, *BSD UNIX,* which has seen many developments since the source code was first released. This means that BSD UNIX no longer exists but has instead diversified into a number of separate projects. *Proprietary* versions are also available, including *Solaris*, *HP-UX*, and *AIX*.

**Upstart**

Replacement for *init*, the software that effectively boots *Ubuntu* into a useable state whenever
the computer is switched on or rebooted. However, Upstart goes beyond the design goals of `init`, and can stop and start various *services* (and also monitor them) on the fly while the system is up
and running.

**user**

The way the operating system refers to anyone who accesses its resources. A user must first have a user account set up, effectively giving that user his or her own private space on the system. In addition to actual human users, an average *Linux* system has many other user accounts created to let programs and *services* go about their business. These are usually not seen by human users.

### V

**variable**

A changeable value that stores a certain data type (such as a number, date, or *string*), remembering it for future reference by the system or *script* it is defined by. Variables defined by and for the *Linux kernel* are vital to it.

**verbose**

*Command* option that will cause it to return more-detailed output (or, in some cases, to return actual output if the command is otherwise “quiet”); usually specified by adding the `-v` command option.

**VFAT**

Virtual File Allocation Table; technical name of Microsoft’s FAT file system offered under Windows and also on removable storage devices such as flash memory cards.

**vi**

Arcane text editor and pseudo-*shell* beloved by *UNIX* aficionados that can be used for creation of text files or programs. Traditionally, UNIX *users* either love or hate vi; some prefer *Emacs*. Nowadays new and improved versions of vi are available, such as vim, used under *Ubuntu*.

### W

**Wine**

Short for Wine Is Not an Emulator; software that re-creates the Windows application programming interface (API) layer within *Linux* and lets *users* run Windows programs.

**workspace**

*X* terminology referring to a *GUI* desktop.

### X

**X**

Short for X Window; software that controls the display and input devices, thereby providing a software foundation on top of which Desktop managers like *GNOME* are able to run.

**X11**

Version 11 of the *X* software, currently in use on most desktop *Linux* systems.

**XFree86 Project**

Organization that creates *X* software. At one time, every *distribution* of *Linux* used XFree86 software, but most now use similar software from the *X.org* organization.

**xinetd**

The *service* responsible for starting various network servers on the computer.

**XMMS**

Audio player program.

**X.org**

Organization that produces the *X* Window software and, in particular, a set of programs called *X11*. X11 is used on most modern distributions of *Linux*. It is backed by a number of *UNIX* and Linux industry leaders.

**xterm**

Simple program that allows you to run a *shell* under *X*. This program has the advantage of being available on most *Linux* systems that offer a *GUI*.

**Xubuntu**

Version of *Ubuntu* that utilizes the XFCE4 desktop *environment* instead of *GNOME*.